                                           Peer Review File

Manuscript Title: Catalogue of Flat Band Stoichiometric Materials



Reviewer Comments & Author Rebuttals

Reviewer Reports on the Initial Version:

Referee #1 (Remarks to the Author):

Report on the manuscript « Catalogue of Flat Band Stoichiometric Materials » by N. Regnault et al.



Key results, Validity and Originality

This article builds on the recent development of topological quantum chemistry by A. Bernevig, N.
Regnault and collaborators. Its specific goal is to identify promising candidate materials displaying
so-called flat energy bands, and potentially displaying exotic strongly interacting phases. The study
of such states of matter originates from the discovery of fractional quantum Hall states in the 80 ’s,
and was seriously revitalized by the recent study of twisted bilayer graphene. Identifying materials in
which physics analogous to twisted bilayer graphene can take place is a natural and major objective
of the material and quantum chemistry community. The present manuscript is the result of the
successful program undertaken by the authors. It is heavily based on a method, coined a S-matrix
approach, developed in a companion manuscript, and the material database developed by a group
around some of the authors. The key results are thus a list of candidates materials which a promising
platform to look for exotic interacting states of matter. I have no doubt that such a catalog will be of
great interest in the following years for exploratory studies of such phases. We can only hope for
new discoveries based on this catalog.



In the recent years, the work by A. Bernevig and co-workers has scrambled the domain of numerical
quantum chemistry, bringing topology as an essential discriminating filter to identify exotic solid
state phases. The results of this manuscript are an attempt to extend the scope of this program
towards strongly interacting states of matter. The methods are original, the results stimulating. The
methods are well presented and convincing, although I cannot comment on the validity of the
numerical approches which are beyond my domain of expertise.



Data & methodology

I have some concerns about the presentation of results, and in particular the huge lists of data
provided in the form of table III, V, VII, VIII.

To my eyes, they look so old fashion and 20th century style. An online datable, such as the one
provided by the authors, is immensely more practical. Hence I question the real use of these long
written tables (besides setting some records). Maybe the sustainability of the data is at sake here. I’ll
leave it to the editor to decide on this point.



Suggested improvements

1. In this article on a subject of strongly interacting phases targeting a broad audience, no mention
to high Tc superconductors is made. I believe that it is the keystone in the community of strong
coupling phases. A contrast (or similarity ?) with the expected phases in flat band materials would be
welcome.



2. A great part of the method used by the authors consists in identifying crystals which possess, even
if approximately, a bipartite (sub)lattice with hopping between its two components. This is just a
geometrical implementation of the chiral symmetry, one of the three symmetries underlying the
ten-fold classification of gapped topological phases (see e.g. Topological Insulators and Topological
Superconductor by A. Bernevig). It was initially discussed in

Bill Sutherland, “Localization of electronic wave func- tions due to local topology,” Phys. Rev. B 34,
5208 (1986)

E. H. Lieb, « Two theorems on the Hubbard model », Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1201 (1989).



and more recently, in the context of topological gapped phases, in e.g.

Shinsei Ryu et al., Topological insulators and superconductors: tenfold way and dimensional
hierarchy, 2010 New J. Phys. 12 065010.



Many implementations in quantum simulators (cold-atoms, light waveguides, polariton lattices) or in
mechanical systems possess this symmetry.

I think that the relation to the chiral symmetry should be mentioned.

Moreover, does the reliance on this (approximate) geometrical symmetry to seek flat bands has
consequences on the topological properties of the single particle eigenstates of the flat band ?

Finally, chiral symmetry is usually only a low energy approximation. Indeed the authors discard
hopping terms smaller than an ad-hoc cutoff. Does this approximation have any consequences on
the strength of interactions to consider and the associated nature of interacting states ?
3. On p.5, five candidate materials are selected and said to be paramagnetic instead of Mott
insulators. It is unclear why this is an advantage. The authors should clarify this point.



4. Flat bands are a single particle notion. Yet the authors have performed Density Functional Theory
(DFT) analysis of the huge list of materials. DFT is known to incorporate effects of (strong) electronic
interactions. What are the implications of this ?

Does that mean that interactions are ineffective in the candidate materials identified by the authors
? Or that DFT did not capture the potential interacting phases and associated gaps ?

This manuscript would constitute a real milestone is a complementary method, such as DMFT and its
various refinements, was use in the five material candidates to precise the nature of possible
interacting instabilities. Given the expertise of the authors, this should not be a major obstacle.



References

Citations [3-6] do not refer to the historical papers on the Fractional Quantum Hall State ! Although I
agree that recent work on topological interacting phases is stimulating, we cannot ignore the history
of the quantum Hall effect which predates the study of fractional Chern insulators. The authors
should do justice to the historical papers of this field, such as the pioneering papers of Robert
Laughlin, Bertrand Halperin and the experimental papers of Horst Störmer, and Daniel Tsui.




Referee #2 (Remarks to the Author):

In this work, Regnault et al report the results from their systematic search of stoichiometric
materials with relatively flat bands over some segments of the Brillouin zone. The main output of the
work is provided as an online database and also in the appendices. The present manuscript is
devoted to introducing the search algorithms and providing more detailed elaboration on five
representative materials they found, together two more in the Appendix. My evaluation on the
manuscript is divided into two aspects. First, whether or not the list of proposed materials will be of
interest to the community. Second, if the approach taken by the authors is novel and could lead to
new developments.



For the first part, there is no doubt that there is immense scientific interest in materials with flat
electronic bands not coming from trivially decoupled atomic orbitals. The present generation of
materials studied is mostly based on a layered kagome motif. The database introduced by the
current work can indeed expand the possible directions in which one looks for new flat-band
materials. The reported materials are not perfect, but they could be interesting especially when
chemically doped to bring the flat bands to the Fermi energy. That said, one has to bear in mind that
the list here is curated out of an earlier work by some of the authors. In a sense, the authors have
now added an additional “flat band” filter to their existing data. This will be useful for those who
would want to look for flat band materials of any sort in any system, excluding the trivially atomic
ones. However, if one starts with a specific material family in mind, one could query the previously
published TQC database and discover for themselves that the electronic bands contain flat
segments. In this regard, the present work adds value by excluding the trivially atomic flat bands.



For the second part, the authors used three main strategies for identifying interesting flat bands. The
first is a relatively crude post-processing of the data in the TQC database to identify flat segments of
electronic bands and peaks in density of states. The second is a geometric approach, which
automatically identifies near-realization of three well known flat band geometries: kagome,
pyrochlore, and Lieb lattices. Such automatic recognition is not a trivial task, given the large number
of space group and Wyckoff combinations that could correspond to the same geometry, and also the
practical need to identify approximate realization of these lattices. This space-group method can be
viewed as crystallography at its finest.



The last approach is centered around what the authors call the “S-matrix method”, which attempts
to generalize the flat bands in split lattices like the Lieb lattice to a more general setup. The
theoretical details of this last method are discussed in a separate paper (arXiv:2106.05272), and the
present work contains a brief introduction in Appendix E. The gist of this method is the observation
that if a system is bipartite and only inter-sublattice couplings are considered, then the Hamiltonian
is block off-diagonal. Furthermore, if the two subsystems have different sizes then the the block
matrix of electron coupling, called S, will admit either left or right zero modes. The last part is an
elementary fact in linear algebra, and as the authors pointed out it does not rely on any further
simplification like use of s orbitals or absence of spin orbit coupling. Although the authors discussed
some slight relaxation, like the possibility of more general intra-sublattice coupling in the smaller
sublattice and also a constant energy shift in the large sublattice, such approximate bipartition is still
a very stringent requirement, as intra-sublattice coupling can easily lead to substantial deviation to
the limit for which the method is applicable.



Therefore, the real question for applying this “S-matrix” approach to material research is the
difficulty in realizing the restriction. In practice, the authors impose a distance cutoff to the electron
coupling range, and then look for materials for which all the remaining couplings are inter-sublattice.
Conceptually, this is a reasonable criterion to impose, but it is unclear to me if an elaborated theory
is required to support this simple criterion. Practically, one can also ask if the incorporation of this
“S-matrix” method adds substantially to the authors’ results, given the Lieb lattice is a special case of
the split lattices, which are special cases of the bipartite lattices. From the last column of Table I, if
we add up the entries flagged as Kagome (54.37%), Pyrochlore (8.11%), Lieb (15.91%), and None
(26.13%), we arrive at 104.52%. Presumably there is no overlap between the None category and the
other three, and it is unclear how much overlapping there is between the three named lattice types.
Without this information, it is unclear how important the “S-matrix" based bipartite and split lattice
methods are for obtaining the authors’ results (after excluding the Lieb lattice).
Author Rebuttals to Initial Comments:



Reply to the ﬁrs t Referee



Key res ults , Validity and Originality



This article builds on the recent developm ent of topological quantum chem is try by A.
Bernevig, N. Regnault and collaborators . Its s peciﬁc goal is to identify prom is ing candidate
m aterials dis playing s o-called ﬂat energy bands , and potentially dis playing exotic s trongly
interacting phas es . The s tudy of s uch s tates of m atter originates from the dis covery of
fractional quantum Hall s tates in the 80 ’s , and was s erious ly revitalized by the recent s tudy
of twis ted bilayer graphene. Identifying m aterials in which phys ics analogous to twis ted
bilayer graphene can take place is a natural and m ajor objective of the m aterial and
quantum chem is try com m unity. The pres ent m anus cript is the res ult of the s ucces s ful
program undertaken by the authors . It is heavily bas ed on a m ethod, coined a S-m atrix
approach, developed in a com panion m anus cript, and the m aterial databas e developed by
a group around s om e of the authors . The key res ults are thus a lis t of candidates m aterials
which a prom is ing platform to look for exotic interacting s tates of m atter. I have no doubt
that s uch a catalog will be of great interes t in the following years for exploratory s tudies of
s uch phas es . We can only hope for new dis coveries bas ed on this catalog.
In the recent years , the work by A. Bernevig and co-workers has s cram bled the dom ain of
num erical quantum chem is try, bringing topology as an es s ential dis crim inating ﬁlter to
identify exotic s olid s tate phas es . The res ults of this m anus cript are an attem pt to extend
the s cope of this program towards s trongly interacting s tates of m atter. The m ethods are
original, the res ults s tim ulating. The m ethods are well pres ented and convincing, although I
cannot com m ent on the validity of the num erical approches which are beyond m y dom ain
of expertis e.

We thank the referee for her/ his pos itive evaluation of our work and s aying “s uch a
catalogue will be of great interes t in the following years for exploratory s tudies of s uch
phas es ”.

The validity of our method has been conﬁrmed by s everal s ucces s ful materia l
predictions . Our current work and catalogue of ﬂat-band materials are bas ed on the
topological material data bas e (https :// www.topologicalqua ntum chem is try.com / ). This
databas e was built us ing ﬁrs t-principles calculations and the Topological Quantum
Chemis try (TQC) theory [Nature 547 (7663), 298-305 (2017), Nature 566 (7745), 480-485
(2019), arXiv:2105.09954(2021)]. The s ucces s of TQC is marked by the new topological
materials it found. For exam ple, the ﬁrs t higher-order topological ins ulator Bi was
predicted by the TQC method and s ucces s fully proved in the experiments [Nature phys ics
14 (9), 918-924 (2018)]; als o, the predicted hinge s tates in Bi4Br4 have been m eas ured
with ARPES experiments [2D Mater. 6 031004(2019); Nature Materials 20, 473– 479
(2021)]. All thes e materials were ﬁrs t availa ble in the TQC high-throughput calcula tions
and material databas e (www.topologicalqua ntumchem is try.com / ). Us ing TQC, the
higher-order hinge arcs in Cd3As 2, KMgBi, and -PtO2 [Nature Com m unications 11, 627
(2020)] were als o predicted and s ubs equently mea s ured in experim ents [Phys . Rev. Lett.
124, 156601 (2020)], and res earchers have predicted the fra gile phas e in twis ted bilayer
graphene [Phys . Rev. Lett. 123,036401 (2019)], the TCI phas e in Pt2HgSe3 [Phys . Rev.
Materials .3.074202 (2019)], the axionic CDW phas e in the Weyl Semim etal (TaSe4)2I
[Nature 575, 315– 319(2019), Nat. Phys . 17, 381-387 (2021)], and the dark m atter detectors
Ag2Au(Se2,Te2) [J. Phys . Mater. 3 014001(2019)]. Hence, we s trongly believe that the
underlying numerical res ults and m ethods for the topological m aterial databas e are
eﬃcient, a s tatement that thus trans pos es to our catalogue of ﬂa t-band ma terials .



Data & methodology



I have s om e concerns about the pres entation of res ults , and in particular the huge lis ts of
data provided in the form of table III, V, VII, VIII.

To m y eyes , they look s o old fas hion and 20th century s tyle. An online datable, s uch as the
one provided by the authors , is im m ens ely m ore practical. Hence I ques tion the real us e of
thes e long written tables (bes ides s etting s om e records ). Maybe the s us tainability of the
data is at s ake here. I’ll leave it to the editor to decide on this point.
We agree that thes e long tables might look outdated. This is why we als o provide full
ﬂedged webs ites with s earch engines . Nevertheles s through colla borations a nd
feedback, we have realized that s ome people are m ore comfortable with tables tha n
webs ites . Some of them actually print thes e tables . Moreover, it provides a convenient
way for data pres erva tion tha t is m a ndatory for publication in s cientiﬁc journals .

The tables s hall be s een as a record and an addition to the webs ites . As s uch, they are
not a s ubs titute to any online feature. Their location in the s upplem entary material is
chos en to avoid dis rupting the text ﬂow. All of them have direct links to our various
webs ites , s o readers can have the bes t of both worlds .



Sugges ted im provem ents



1. In this article on a s ubject of s trongly interacting phas es targeting a broad audience, no
m ention to high Tc s uperconductors is m ade. I believe that it is the keys tone in the
com m unity of s trong coupling phas es . A contras t (or s im ilarity ?) with the expected phas es
in ﬂat band m aterials would be welcom e.



We thank the referee for pointing out high Tc s uperconductors as releva nt for a broad
audience. Our databas e, as well as the lis ts of curated and bes t repres entative m aterials ,
informs the reader if a material is known to be a s uperconductor (including high Tc),
bas ed on the NIMS Materials Databas e (https :// mits .nims .go.jp/ en/ ). Additionally, this
point is now explicitly written at the end of the introduction “Our clas s iﬁcation and
predictions take into account the different ﬂat band natures , including their topological
character, and our databas e is coupled to the Materials Project and the NIMS Materials
Databas e, providing inform ation about the m agnetic and s uperconducting properties
(including high Tc) of the candidate m aterials .”Moreover, we have s hortened the
introduction and put more empha s is on the exotic phas es that m ight em erge from ﬂat
topological bands .



2. A great part of the m ethod us ed by the authors cons is ts in identifying crys tals which
pos s es s , even if approxim ately, a bipartite (s ub)lattice with hopping between its two
com ponents . This is jus t a geom etrical im plem entation of the chiral s ym m etry, one of the
three s ym m etries underlying the ten-fold clas s iﬁcation of gapped topological phas es (s ee
e.g. Topological Ins ulators and Topological Superconductor by A. Bernevig). It was initially
dis cus s ed in

Bill Sutherland, “Localization of electronic wave func- tions due to local topology,”Phys .
Rev. B 34, 5208 (1986)

E. H. Lieb, « Two theorem s on the Hubbard m odel », Phys . Rev. Lett. 62, 1201 (1989).

and m ore recently, in the context of topological gapped phas es , in e.g.
Shins ei Ryu et al., Topological ins ulators and s uperconductors : tenfold way and
dim ens ional hierarchy, 2010 New J. Phys . 12 065010.

Many im plem entations in quantum s im ulators (cold-atom s , light waveguides , polariton
lattices ) or in m echanical s ys tem s pos s es s this s ym m etry.

I think that the relation to the chiral s ym m etry s hould be m entioned.




We thank the referee for pointing this out. We have added s everal s entences dis cus s ing
the relations hip between ﬂat bands and the chiral s ym m etry in the Methods s ection of
the revis ed manus cript. The related references a re als o cited.

We emphas ize that the S-matrix method us ed in this pres ented work, as well as the BR
s ubduction rule us ed in our accompanying work [arXiv:2106.05272 (2021)], goes beyond
the (approximate) chiral s ymmetry. In general, a bipartite lattice cons is ts of two
s ublattices L and L’, which have N L and N L’ (<NL) orbitals per unit cell, res pectively. Its
Ham iltonia n matrix is ,




where Ak (Bk) is a NL * NL ( NL’ * NL’) Hermitian m atrix denoting the intra -s ublattice hopping
ins ide the L (L’) s ublattice and S k denotes the hopping m atrix between s ublattices L and
(L’). The pres ence of the chiral s ym metry in a bipartite lattice forbids any intra-s ublattice
hopping terms and hence Ak= Bk=0. Then, as has been proved in Appendix E1 and als o in
our accompanying work [arXiv:2106.05272 (2021)], Hk contains at lea s t N L - NL’ zero
modes in the whole k-s pace giving ris e to N L - NL’ perfectly ﬂat bands , as well as 2NL’
dis pers ive bands com ing in pa irs related by the chira l s ym m etry.

A s imilar argument for the exis tence of ﬂat bands holds for a generalized bipartite lattice,
which includes intra-s ublattice coupling and breaking of the chiral s ymm etry. To s ee this ,
we as s ume that Ak has a momentum independent eigenvalue (E=a) with degeneracy n a. If
NL’ < n a ≤ NL , then Hk has at leas t n a - NL’ perfectly ﬂat ba nds of energy E=a irres pective of
Bk. (This s tatement is proved in the Appendix I4 of the a ccompanying work
arXiv:2106.05272). Compared to the chiral ca s e, the pres ence of intra-s ublattice hopping
in the s maller s ublattice (L’) gaps the accidental band touching points that exis t in a chiral
cas e. On the other hand, the eigens tates of thes e n a - N L’ ﬂat bands as well as the s table
touching points remain unperturbed in the genera lized bipartite lattice. (More details can
be found in Appendix I4 of Ref. [arXiv:2106.05272]).



Moreover, does the reliance on this (approxim ate) geom etrical s ym m etry to s eek ﬂat bands
has cons equences on the topological properties of the s ingle particle eigens tates of the
ﬂat band ?
As pointed out in the Sec II B “Geometric frus tration in (line-graph and bipartite) lattices
is known to give ris e to exact FTBs ”, In fact, many interference-originated bands are
topologically nontrivial. Some examples were dis cus s ed in detail in s ome recent works ,
e.g. Phys . Rev. B 78, 125104 (2008), Phys . Rev. B 99, 125122 (2019), Phys . Rev. Lett. 125
(26), 266403 (2020), Phys . Rev. Res earch.2.043414 (2020). A s ys tema tic theoretical
framework bas ed on topological quantum chemis try to clas s ify and diagnos e the
ﬂat-band topology is dis cus s ed in an accom panying work [arXiv:2106.05272 (2021)]. In
the S-matrix method, in order for the ba nd s tructure to pos s es s ﬂat bands , the two
s ublattices s hould in general have different numbers of degrees of freedom. Let us s ay
the two s ublattices L and L’, which have NL and NL’ (<N L) orbitals per unit cell, res pectively.
Then there s hould be NL-NL’ ﬂat bands at zero energy. Moreover, if the larger and s ma ller
s ublattices form the band repres entations BR and BR’, res pectively, the repres enta tion
formed by the ﬂat bands is given by BR-BR’. (In topological quantum chemis try, the
terminology band repres entation refers to a repres entation form ed by local orbita ls . In
other words , band repres entations a re topologically trivial ins ulators .) If BR-BR’ is not
cons is tent with any band repres entation, the ﬂat bands m us t be topological. Exa m ples of
the BR s ubduction rule can be found in [arXiv:2106.05272 (2021)].

As explained above, the S-matrix method, as well as the BR s ubduction rule, goes beyond
the (approximate) chiral s ymmetry. Starting with a bipartite lattice s atis fying the chiral
s ymmetry, the ﬂatnes s and topology of the ﬂa t bands will pers is t even if intra-s ublattice
hoppings (which break the chiral s ymmetry) are added, provided that the total
Ham iltonia n is s till a s o-called “generalized bipartite crys talline lattice”



Finally, chiral s ym m etry is us ually only a low energy approxim ation. Indeed the authors
dis card hopping term s s m aller than an ad-hoc cutoff. Does this approxim ation have any
cons equences on the s trength of interactions to cons ider and the as s ociated nature of
interacting s tates ?



We thank the referee for this comment. In fact, there is no ad-hoc cutoff adopted in the
DFT calculations . As s hown cas e by cas e of the s ix types of m aterials in Appendices
F1-F6, the ﬁrs t-principles calculations without any ad-hoc cutoff s how alm os t perfect ﬂat
bands around the chemical potential. In the no-free parameter Wannier tight-binding
Hamiltonian of thes e materials , we ﬁnd the kinetic hopping parameters beyond a certa in
dis tance are negligible, and the hoppings within the cutoff dis tance s atis fy our S-matrix
conditions . Hence even when the negligible hoppings are cons idered in the model, the ﬂa t
bands will only become s lightly dis pers ive or even pers is t to be perfectly ﬂat. If pres ent,
the negligible dis pers ion won’t cha nge the interacting phys ics s ince the interaction has a
much larger energy s cale.
3. On p.5, ﬁve candidate m aterials are s elected and s aid to be param agnetic ins tead of
Mott ins ulators . It is unclear why this is an advantage. The authors s hould clarify this point.




We thank the referee for this com ment. In the main text, we only s howca s e the ma terials
that have ﬂat bands and non-ferromagnetic ground s tate becaus e all the ﬁrs t-principles
calculations on the material databas e are paramagnetic (i.e., without the on-s ite s pin
polarization) and in a s ingle-particle (mean ﬁeld) approxima tion. We tagged materia ls
reported as magnetic on the Material Project Databas e or experim entally in the tables of
Appendix H, but we did not perform the high-throughput m agnetic calculations and
topological clas s iﬁcations for their magnetic ground s tates . In the revis ed manus cript,
we clariﬁed this point in the ﬁrs t pa ragraph of Sec III B of the main text, i.e., “All of the
ﬁve repres entative ﬂat-band m aterials are chem ically realis tic, experim entally
param agnetic and not Mott ins ulators , which is cons is tent with our param agnetic
calculations ”.



4. Flat bands are a s ingle particle notion. Yet the authors have perform ed Dens ity
Functional Theory (DFT) analys is of the huge lis t of m aterials . DFT is known to incorporate
effects of (s trong) electronic interactions . What are the im plications of this ?

Does that m ean that interactions are ineffective in the candidate m aterials identiﬁed by the
authors ? Or that DFT did not capture the potential interacting phas es and as s ociated gaps
?



We thank the referee for this valuable comment. In the previous works , i.e., [Nature 547,
298-305 (2017), Nature 566, 480-485 (2019)] and this pres ent m anus cript, we have
applied the GGA exchange-correlation potential and enforced the param agnetic phas e in
the DFT calculations . The GGA potential us ually cannot capture orbita l-s elected
interactions , like Hubbard U for 3d, 4d, and 4f electrons . Therefore, for para magnetic
materials without correlated atom s (with 3d, 4d, or 4f electrons ), one can think that the
interaction effect is already incorporated at a m ea n-ﬁeld level and the ﬂa t ba nd is a
feature of the mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian. However, for ma gnetic ma teria ls or materials with
correlated electrons, one can regard the band s tructures in our work as s pectra of the
“s ingle-particle” Hamiltonians . Spin s plitting and/ or Hubbard U or Hund’s interactions
s hould be included to des cribe magnetis m and/ or s trong correla tion phys ics .

In the newly a dded Appendix (Appendix G of the revis ed Supplem entary Materials ), we
picked four ﬂat-band materials which are ferrom agnetic in experiments . We performed
DFT calculations for the magnetic a nd non-m agnetic pha s es us ing the GGA+U method
(which included the on-s ite Hubbard U value of ‘d’ or ‘f’ electrons in the m ean-ﬁeld
approximation). By comparing the total energy of the non-m agnetic and m a gnetic phas es
for different U values (varying from 0 to 5 eV) with and without SOC, we found tha t the
magnetic pha s es always have lower tota l energies . The theoretically obta ined m agnetic
moments of thes e four materials are in agreement with the experimental res ults . Hence,
their magnetic ground s tates can be captured by the GGA+U calculation. We als o ﬁnd
that the ﬂat bands obta ined in the paramagnetic ca lculations , dis played in the res ults
s ection of the manus cript, remain in the ferroma gnetic ca lculations .



This m anus cript would cons titute a real m iles tone if a com plem entary m ethod, s uch as
DMFT and its various reﬁnem ents , was us ed in the ﬁve m aterial candidates to precis e the
nature of pos s ible interacting ins tabilities . Given the expertis e of the authors , this s hould
not be a m ajor obs tacle.



We thank the referee for the s ugges tion to us e alternative/ com plementary methods to
tes t the many-body interacting ground s tates vers us the experim ental ones . We us ed GGA
+U to uncover the magnetic ground s ta te of four com pounds in the newly added Appendix
(Appendix G of the revis ed Supplementary Ma terials ). The theoretical res ults
match the experimentally publis hed s tructures well. Becaus e the s tructures a re
ferromagnetic and the GGA+U calculation clearly converges fas t to the correct
experimental ground s tate, we expect further alternative methods to give the s am e res ult,
at leas t for the experimentally known s trong ferrom agnetic com pounds . Speciﬁcally, in
this newly added Appendix, we picked four ﬂa t-band m aterials i.e. SrRuO3[ICSD 69360],
Rb2MnCl6[ICSD 9347], Ba2MnReO6[ICSD 4169], and NiMnSb[ICSD 54255] which are
ferromagnetic in experim ents and did the DFT calculations . The res ults s how tha t the
GGA+U method ca n predict the ground s tate of the m agnetic ground s tate. The m agnetic
band s tructures are s hown in ﬁgures 23-26 in the revis ed Supplementary Materia ls . We
ﬁnd that, in the paramagnetic calcula tions , when the Hubbard U values are added the ﬂa t
bands remain at (or clos e to) the Fermi level. When we turn to the ferromagnetic
calculations , for different U values , the ﬂat bands are no longer located at the Ferm i level
but s plit into two s ets of ﬂat ba nds nea r the Ferm i level. Thus , the ﬂat band fea tures
obtained in the paramagnetic calculations , dis played in the res ults s ection of the
manus cript, remain in the ferromagnetic calculations , but their energies change. This type
of res ults jus tiﬁes why we a re conﬁdent tha t a high-throughput s earch for ﬂa t bands
bas ed on paramagnetic ab-initio calculations (without SOC) is both m ea ningful and
releva nt even for potentially (a nti-)ferromagnetic m aterials .




References

Citations [3-6] do not refer to the his torical papers on the Fractional Quantum Hall State !
Although I agree that recent work on topological interacting phas es is s tim ulating, we
cannot ignore the his tory of the quantum Hall effect which predates the s tudy of fractional
Chern ins ulators . The authors s hould do jus tice to the his torical papers of this ﬁeld, s uch
as the pioneering papers of Robert Laughlin, Bertrand Halperin and the experim ental
papers of Hors t Störm er, and Daniel Ts ui.



We apologize for this m is take. We agree that we s hould have cited there the pioneer work
in the ﬁeld of fractional Quantum Hall effect. We have ﬁxed the citations in the
manus cript.




Reply to the s econd Referee



In this work, Regnault et al report the res ults from their s ys tem atic s earch of s toichiom etric
m aterials with relatively ﬂat bands over s om e s egm ents of the Brillouin zone. The m ain
output of the work is provided as an online databas e and als o in the appendices . The
pres ent m anus cript is devoted to introducing the s earch algorithm s and providing m ore
detailed elaboration on ﬁve repres entative m aterials they found, together two m ore in the
Appendix. My evaluation on the m anus cript is divided into two as pects . Firs t, whether or
not the lis t of propos ed m aterials will be of interes t to the com m unity. Second, if the
approach taken by the authors is novel and could lead to new developm ents .



For the ﬁrs t part, there is no doubt that there is im m ens e s cientiﬁc interes t in m aterials with
ﬂat electronic bands not com ing from trivially decoupled atom ic orbitals . The pres ent
generation of m aterials s tudied is m os tly bas ed on a layered kagom e m otif. The databas e
introduced by the current work can indeed expand the pos s ible directions in which one
looks for new ﬂat-band m aterials .



We thank the referee for her/ his evalua tion of our work s tating that“The databas e
introduced by the current work can indeed expand the pos s ible directions in which one
looks for new ﬂat-band m aterials ”. Indeed, the m ethod given in our m anus cript is
exhaus tive and general. The ﬂat bands that a ttracted abundant s cientiﬁc interes t in the
phys ics and materials communities do not originate from decoupled atomic orbitals . At
pres ent, almos t all the known m aterials that pos s es s ﬂat bands and the models
predicting the ﬂat bands can be expla ined us ing our S-matrix theory. (See Section II of
Supplementary Materials of arXiv:2106.05272 (2021).)



The reported m aterials are not perfect, but they could be interes ting es pecially when
chem ically doped to bring the ﬂat bands to the Ferm i energy.
We agree with the referee that there are s everal m aterials with ﬂat bands away from the
Fermi level and hence chemical doping is needed. Nevertheles s , as tabula ted in Appendix
G3, we s elect 345 bes t materia l candidates (corres ponding to 949 ICSD entries ) that have
ﬂat bands on or very clos e to the Fermi level. Thes e m aterials do not need (or jus t need
a s light) chemical doping to have the Fermi level run through the ﬂat bands .



That s aid, one has to bear in m ind that the lis t here is curated out of an earlier work by
s om e of the authors . In a s ens e, the authors have now added an additional “ﬂat band”ﬁlter
to their exis ting data.



As we point out in the manus cript, we indeed rely on the la tes t vers ion of the TQC
databas e [arXiv:2105.09954(2021)]. With the exception of the projected dens ity of s tates
(DOS), the band s tructure, lattice inform ation a nd the topologica l properties were already
available on the TQC webs ite. But the work pres ented in this manus cript goes beyond
s im ple addition of a “ﬂat band” ﬁlter. To perform a high-throughput s ea rch of relevant
ﬂa t-band m aterials , we have developed s everal tools to detect fea tures in the band
s tructures , DOS and lattice s tructures , as detailed at length in the Supplem entary
Materials . The whole data had to be proces s ed through thes e tools , and organized to
dis cover the mos t interes ting and promis ing compounds . The webs ite m ight look like a
fully-tunable ﬁlter on the TQC databas e to the end us er, but this im pres ion s hould not
overs ha dow the work and complexity lying under the hood.



This will be us eful for thos e who would want to look for ﬂat band m aterials of any s ort in
any s ys tem , excluding the trivially atom ic ones . However, if one s tarts with a s peciﬁc
m aterial fam ily in m ind, one could query the previous ly publis hed TQC databas e and
dis cover for them s elves that the electronic bands contain ﬂat s egm ents .



Technically, the referee is right: s omeone could look for a given com pound, check if it has
non-trivial ﬂat bands and compute if thes e ﬂat bands emerge from a rema rkable
s ublattice. Still, it would not be pos s ible to s earch through all the m aterials without the
tools , data proces s ing, and concepts that we have developed in this m anus cript and the
a ccompanying pa per on S-m atrix m ethod. Of cours e, a pers on m otiva ted enough could
theoretically perform a manual check of the individual 35k entries (a s everal m onths of
tedious work) to look for new candida tes . With the new webs ite that we provide to the
community, it only takes a few s econds . We are s ure that the referee appreciates the
value of s uch tools .



In this regard, the pres ent work adds value by excluding the trivially atom ic ﬂat bands .
We would like to convince the referee this is fa r from being the only added value. Bes ides
the tools des cribed in the reply to the las t ques tion, in this work we als o explained the
phys ical origins of the ﬂatnes s and why they tend not to be atom ic ﬂat bands . We point
out that the method als o s hows why ﬂat bands by interference tend to be topological.

(i) A s ys tematic theoretical fram ework for ﬂa t ba nds , i.e., the S-matrix m ethod, is
developed in the accompanying work [arXiv:2106.05272 (2021)] and brieﬂy dis cus s ed in
the Appendix E of the pres ent work. In general, if there are two s ublattices connecting to
each other and the hoppings within each s ubla ttice either vanis h or s atis fy the s o-called
“generalized bipartite lattice” condition, there will be exact ﬂat bands in the middle of the
s pectrum. The number of ﬂat bands depends on the number of orbitals in the two
s ublattices and the rank of the hopping m atrix.

(ii) In the pres ent work, we have applied the S-m atrix theory to expla in the ﬂatnes s found
in the band s tructures in the databas e. In Appendices F1-F6, we demons trate the S-ma trix
theory in s ix ﬂat-band materials by explicitly cons tructing the effective tight-binding
models . In Appendix H, we exhaus tively tabulated a ll materials with bipa rtite lattice
s tructures or line-graph lattice s tructures . (Flat bands in line-graph can als o be explained
by the S-matrix.) We categorized the ma terials into Kagome, Lieb, pyrochlore, a nd generic
bipartite lattices . A large number of materia ls (3756 ICSDs ) with s uch s pecial lattices are
found to pos s es s ﬂat bands .

(iii) As explained in the reply to the ﬁrs t referee, the topology of the ﬂat ba nds can be
eas ily determined by a band repres enta tion s ubduction rule. (In topological quantum
chemis try, the term band repres entation refers to a repres entation form ed by local
orbitals . In other words , band repres entations are trivial ins ulators .) We s uppos e that the
larger s ubla ttice in the S-matrix theory forms a band repres entation BR a nd the s maller
s ublattice forms a band repres entation BR’, then the repres entation of the ﬂat bands will
be BR-BR’. There is a high chance that BR-BR’is not cons is tent with any atom ic orbitals in
the given s ys tem. BR-BR’ may even be a topological band if it cannot be written as a s um
of elem entary ba nd repres enta tions .



For the s econd part, the authors us ed three m ain s trategies for identifying interes ting ﬂat
bands . The ﬁrs t is a relatively crude pos t-proces s ing of the data in the TQC databas e to
identify ﬂat s egm ents of electronic bands and peaks in dens ity of s tates . The s econd is a
geom etric approach, which autom atically identiﬁes near-realization of three well known ﬂat
band geom etries : kagom e, pyrochlore, and Lieb lattices . Such autom atic recognition is not
a trivial tas k, given the large num ber of s pace group and Wyckoff com binations that could
corres pond to the s am e geom etry, and als o the practical need to identify approxim ate
realization of thes e lattices . This s pace-group m ethod can be viewed as crys tallography at
its ﬁnes t.



We are pleas ed to s ee the referee a ppreciates the complexity of identifying thes e
rem arkable lattices . We hope our effort that s he/ he em pha s izes , will be helpful to a la rge
community, beyond the one of quantum m aterials .
The las t approach is centered around what the authors call the “S-m atrix m ethod”, which
attem pts to generalize the ﬂat bands in s plit lattices like the Lieb lattice to a m ore general
s etup. The theoretical details of this las t m ethod are dis cus s ed in a s eparate paper
(arXiv:2106.05272), and the pres ent work contains a brief introduction in Appendix E. The
gis t of this m ethod is the obs ervation that if a s ys tem is bipartite and only inter-s ublattice
couplings are cons idered, then the Ham iltonian is block off-diagonal. Furtherm ore, if the
two s ubs ys tem s have different s izes then the the block m atrix of electron coupling, called
S, will adm it either left or right zero m odes . The las t part is an elem entary fact in linear
algebra, and as the authors pointed out it does not rely on any further s im pliﬁcation like us e
of s orbitals or abs ence of s pin orbit coupling. Although the authors dis cus s ed s om e s light
relaxation, like the pos s ibility of m ore general intra-s ublattice coupling in the s m aller
s ublattice and als o a cons tant energy s hift in the large s ublattice, s uch approxim ate
bipartition is s till a very s tringent requirem ent, as intra-s ublattice coupling can eas ily lead
to s ubs tantial deviation to the lim it for which the m ethod is applicable.



We would like to convince the referee tha t the argum ent “s uch approxim ate bipartition is
s till a very s tringent requirem ent, as intra-s ublattice coupling can eas ily lead to s ubs tantial
deviation to the lim it for which the m ethod is applicable” does not hold here. Firs t, we point
out tha t almos t all the known mecha nis m s of ﬂat bands can be thought of as s pecial
types of the S-matrix theory. (See Section II of Supplem entary Ma terials of
arXiv:2106.05272 (2021).) In this s ens e, the S-m atrix is already the mos t generic and
powerful theory framework for ﬂat ba nds . As fa r as we know, there is no theory that can
guarantee ﬂat bands and does not require the chiral s ymmetry or any “s tringent”
conditions on the hoppings .

Second, whether the S-matrix is a “s tringent” condition s hould be ans wered by the actual
material s earch. In fact, many materia ls are indeed well des cribed by the S-m atrix theory.
In Appendices F1-F6, we s how how the S-m atrix theory ca n s ucces s fully explain ﬂat
bands in s ix example prototypical materials by explicitly cons tructing/ extracting the
effective tight-binding models . In Appendix H, we ﬁnd that materials with bipartite lattice
s tructures or line-graph lattice s tructures (s pecial cas es of the S-matrix theory) have
higher chances to pos s es s ﬂat ba nds .



Therefore, the real ques tion for applying this “S-m atrix” approach to m aterial res earch is
the diﬃculty in realizing the res triction.



As s hown for the s ix materials given in Appendix F, the res ults obtained from the S-matrix
method match well with thos e from the DFT calculations . We picked thes e s ix ma terials
as typical examples of compounds that ca n have ﬂat bands . The m aterials lis ted at the
end of each s ubs ection of Appendix F 1~ 6 are ana logous with thes e s ix m aterials , and
their corres ponding ﬂat bands can be explained by the S-m atrix m ethod (s om etim es the
s am e S m atrices ). Moreover, the S-m atrix method can be applied to all ﬂat bands that a re
not formed by the decoupled atom ic orbital. Thus , realizing the S-matrix requirem ents in
real materia ls is fea s ible.



In practice, the authors im pos e a dis tance cutoff to the electron coupling range, and then
look for m aterials for which all the rem aining couplings are inter-s ublattice. Conceptually,
this is a reas onable criterion to im pos e, but it is unclear to m e if an elaborated theory is
required to s upport this s im ple criterion.



We thank the referee for this com ment. In principle, the dis tance between two orbitals
a ffects the s trength of coupling between them (if the coupling is not
s ymm etry-guaranteed to be zero). As we s how in the Appendix F1 of the revis ed
Supplementary Materials on WO3 as an exam ple, the S-m atrix theory captures the m ain
coupling (inter-s ublattice coupling 1.654 eV) that form s ﬂa t bands . The neglected
couplings (i.e., the intra-s ublattice couplings -0.222 eV and 0.179 eV) are m uch weaker
than the inter-s ublattice coupling. The as s umption that intra-s ubla ttice couplings va nis h
is in good agreem ent with the DFT res ults .



Practically, one can als o as k if the incorporation of this “S-m atrix” m ethod adds
s ubs tantially to the authors ’ res ults , given the Lieb lattice is a s pecial cas e of the s plit
lattices , which are s pecial cas es of the bipartite lattices . From the las t colum n of Table I, if
we add up the entries ﬂagged as Kagom e (54.37%), Pyrochlore (8.11%), Lieb (15.91%), and
None (26.13%), we arrive at 104.52%. Pres um ably there is no overlap between the None
category and the other three, and it is unclear how m uch overlapping there is between the
three nam ed lattice types . Without this inform ation, it is unclear how im portant the
“S-m atrix" bas ed bipartite and s plit lattice m ethods are for obtaining the authors ’ res ults
(after excluding the Lieb lattice).



As the referee pointed out, there is no overlap between the category “None” and the other
categories . But indeed, we do have overlaps between the remarkable s ublattices . A trivial
example is the overlap between the “Kagom e” and the “Pyrochlore” categories , s ince
every pyrochlore lattice detection will als o trigger a kagome lattice detection. Moreover,
s ome compounds might hos t both a kagome lattice and, e.g., a bipartite la ttice. One s uch
example is WO3 in SG 221 (ICSD 108651) and dis cus s ed in Appendix F

https :// www.topologicalquantumchem is try.fr/ ﬂatbands / index.htm l?ICSD=108651.



The online vers ion of the bes t cas es (the las t colum n pointed out by the referee) is
available here

https :// www.topologicalquantumchem is try.fr/ ﬂatbands / bes tﬂatba nd.htm l.
There, it is ea s y to obs erve this is not a n is olated cas e. To be more quantitative, there are
247 ICSD entries among the 949 ICSD entries in the lis t of bes t ca s es that have both a
Kagome and a bipartite s ublattice. We have added tables in Appendix C providing the
number of cas es where a materia l hos ts both a Kagom e/ pyrochlore and a bipa rtite
s ublattices .

Still we s tres s that the Kagome/ pyrochlore s ublattices can als o be viewed a s a limit cas e
in the S-matrix form alis m. In principle for any given ma terial, we could perform the s ame
S-matrix analys is that we did in Appendix F to a s s ociate each ﬂat-band s egm ent to one
type of s ublattice. While a s ys tem atic (high throughput) S-m a trix des cription is out of
reach, Appendix F already covers m ore than 50 m a terials . The above mentioned WO3 is a
perfect example. The ﬂat bands aris e from the bipartite lattice made of the W and O
a toms . The Ka gome lattice made only from the O a toms does not contribute to the ﬂat
s egment but is s till a utom a tically detected by our algorithm .
Reviewer Reports on the First Revision:

Referee #1 (Remarks to the Author):

The authors have revised mostly the supplementary material to answer questions by both referees.
In particular I appreciate the addition of results on ferromagnetic flat band materials obtained using
a GGA+U method, as well as the brief discussion of flat band in (effectively) chiral symmetric lattice
models in the Method section.



I am convinced that this paper will have substantial impact in search for various exotic phases in flat
band materials and I recommend its publication.




Referee #2 (Remarks to the Author):

I thank the authors for the reply to the comments and for the efforts to revise the manuscript. In
particular, I appreciate the authors’ effort to clarify the relevance of the “S-matrix”-based method in
the identification of good flat band materials. As the authors wrote, “whether the S-matrix is a
“stringent” condition should be answered by the actual material search.” I totally agree with this
point, and as I noted in the original report it is important to clarify the relevance of the “S-matrix”
formalism in the material search.



For instance, suppose one simply goes through the existing database using the DOS and flat-band
segment checks and the crystallographic screening of the three remarkable lattice types (kagome,
pyrochlore, and Lieb), how many of the 949 “best” flat band materials will remain in the “None”
category, i.e., will not have an identified physical origin for the emergence of flat bands? Currently,
we know that 949 (all under “best) -248 (None) = 701 of the materials can be explained. If, for
instance, one finds that kagome + pyrochlore + Lieb accounts for 700 of these entries, then one
could say that the S-matrix formalism has helped to explain the physical origin of flat bands in 1
extra material through the bipartite lattice search. This is a non-zero yield, but one would likely
agree that it is not very significant (1/701). (Of course, this interpretation did not take into account
cases like WO3, which would have been flagged under the kagome category although, as explained
by the authors, the kagome sub-lattice has nothing to do with the flat bands near the Fermi level.
But isolating such cases will require some more in-depth analysis of the identified materials.)



I believe the conclusion of the manuscript will be significantly strengthened if the authors can simply
quantify the explanatory power of the “S-matrix theory” by providing a direct answer to the
following question: how many entries have been “rescued” from the None category through the
bipartite lattice search? In the first version of the manuscript, it was difficult to even estimate the
yield of the S-matrix discussion because of the overlapping between the three named lattice types.
In the revised manuscript, the authors have presented data concerning the overlaps in Table III of
Appendix C. For instance, it is interesting to realize that of the 151 Lieb lattices in the “best” column,
135 of them are simultaneously identified under the kagome category. This accounts for a good
fraction of the overlap between the three named lattice types. If we assume there is no overlap
between kagome and pyrochlore, the numbers add up to be 516 (kagome) + 77 (pyrochlore) + 16
(“pure” Lieb which is neither kagome nor pyrochlore) = 609. This suggests the remaining 701-609 =
92 materials are really explained by the bipartite lattice search. If that is a fair estimate, it will be a
decent yield (92/701 of the explained material = 13%), and the readers will likely be much more
convinced that the S-matrix theory has additional explanatory power beyond providing a framework
for the interpretation of the well-known flat-band lattice types.



Lastly, a comment on terminology: as the authors definitely know, the term “S-matrix” has a
widespread, well-accepted meaning in physics. The authors’ decision to call their framework “S-
matrix” seems to come from the rather ad hoc choice of using the symbol S to denote the off-
diagonal entry in the Bloch Hamiltonian. In my opinion, this is not descriptive, and serves little other
than confusing the reader given the existing common usage of the term “S-matrix” elsewhere. A
more boring but descriptive name, like “generalized bipartite theory”, will likely be a better choice.
Of course, in any case the authors have the jurisdiction on how they would want to call their theory.
Author Rebuttals to First Revision:

Reply to the Referee #2:


We are grateful to the referee for her/his appreciation of our updated version. Beyond her/his
compliment, s/he also proposes to emphasize the relevance of the “S-matrix” in the material
search by a one number indicator.

As the referee clearly knows, kagome, pyrochlore or Lieb lattices are all included in the S-matrix
formalism, showing that it covers more than bipartite lattices (or slightly variant of them). Without
diving into the accompanying theoretical paper (that will appear in Nature Physics), we provided
in Appendix E1 how the kagome can be casted into the S-matrix formalism. Still, we understand
the fair question of the referee: does this formalism bring anything beyond these three
types mentioned above?

The referee actually provides a very simple quantitative test: among the “best candidates”
list, how many compounds host solely a bipartite lattice? As she/he pointed out, the flat
band near a Fermi energy of a given compound hosting both a bipartite and another remarkable
lattice (a Lieb, Kagome or pyrochlore) could arise from the bipartite sublattice and thus only
captured by the S-matrix formalism. But such a systematic analysis is out of reach (as
acknowledged by the referee). The number of compounds hosting only a bipartite lattice thus
provides a lower bound for the number of compounds explained by the S-matrix formalism.
Among the 701 ICSD entries in the “best candidates” list where we have detected at least one
sublattice, 155 entries only host a bipartite lattice and thus can have their flat bands explained
by the S-matrix formalism. So the yield (155/701 = 22%) is even better than the one quoted as
“decent” (13%) proposed by the referee. We have added a few sentences in Appendix D3 to
highlight this result.


In addition to this direct and concise answer to her/his suggested test, we would like to bring to
the referee’s attention two other quantitative pieces of evidence that the S-matrix formalism
does provide an invaluable tool to probe flat bands, beyond the remarkable lattices.

   1) In Appendix F and in the supplementary material of the accompanying theoretical article
      (in the version that will be published in Nature Physics), we have presented four
      prototypical examples of materials (Pb2Sb2O7, WO3, CaNi5 and Ca2Ta2O7) where the flat
      bands are captured by the S-matrix formalism and not by any other remarkable lattices.
      Overall, if we include materials with a similar structure, we cover 269 ICSD entries
      including 129 belonging to the “best candidates” list.

   2)     We would like to point out a recent preprint by C. Chui et al. arXiv:2109.13940 about
        line graph lattice crystal structures. They performed a high-throughput search of this
        specific type of lattice on our data set. Their results have been added to our database so
        we can test how their results overlap with our findings. The line graph lattices are also
        captured by the S-matrix formalism (note that the number 155 quoted above explicitly
       excluded compounds with a line graph sublattice, including these latest would add 14
       entries). Thus these results provide a concrete test to show that more flat band
       candidates are described by our approach than we actually promote in our own article.
       Overall, this line graph high throughput search has found 1633 ICSD entries (related to
       1044 unique materials) that are distinct from our own survey of bipartite, Lieb, split,
       kagome or pyrochlore lattices (i.e., the “None” category). Among them, 138 (15) ICSD
       entries belong to our list of curated (best) flat band candidates. Among them we have for
       example
            ● MgO (SG 223)
               https://www.topologicalquantumchemistry.fr/flatbands/index.html?ICSD=181465
            ● Al8Fe4Hf (SG 139)
               https://www.topologicalquantumchemistry.fr/flatbands/index.html?ICSD=607535
            ● Ge O3 Sr (SG 189)
               https://www.topologicalquantumchemistry.fr/flatbands/index.html?ICSD=28603
       Even though this does not cover all the materials part of the “None” category, it clearly
       shows that another subclass of lattices encompassed by our S-matrix approach detects
       and captures potential candidate flat band materials not covered by the previous
       categories.
       At the moment, there are no systematic approaches to find the S-matrix description of all
       flat band candidates. But we are confident that akin to the line graph example, specific
       subclasses of S-matrix models can be designed to largely complete this task, an
       information that would be then added to our database.




Finally, we understand the referee’s concern about the potential confusion when using the
expression “S-matrix” in Physics where a similar term could mean the scattering matrix. Now
other expressions such as “generalized bipartite theory” proposed by the referee also have their
pitfalls. In that precise example, this would wrongly suggest that, e.g. line graphs or kagome
lattices are excluded from this model which is not correct. Moreover, the term has already been
coined and used in other publications (such as arXiv:2109.13940). For these reasons, we prefer
to stick to the current denomination.
